- Hello everyone out there on the live stream.
Hey Paul, hey Barry.
- Hey. - Hello.
- Hey, great to have you both here.
Those of you on YouTube,
please drop your comments and thoughts in the live chat
and we'll try to make it part of your show.
And yeah, without further ado, let's kick this off.
Barry and Paul, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks for having us.
- Yeah, it's super to have you both here.
Now, Paul, you've been on the show before
and we've talked about a few things.
Barry, I don't think I've had you on Talk Python,
but we had both of you on Python Bytes at a live PyCon.
You guys remember that?
People got in a room.
No one was like frightened when you would get
somewhat near them, they wouldn't run away.
It was great.
- Good times.
- Those were good times.
- That was a lot of energy
back before you did live virtually.
Is that what you call this?
- VLive, something like that, yeah.
- Yeah, that was really cool.
I mean, we had that at the PyCharm booth actually.
We had like the whole broadcast thing going on there.
It was a lot of fun.
We'll do it again.
- Yeah, it really was. - We'll get back to this.
I mean, I don't know how you two feel about it,
but to me, PyCon and similar events,
that's like my geek holiday.
I get away and I get to learn stuff
and make professional connections,
but I also get to see all my friends
from all around the world and just share stories
and have a beer with them
when I would just never otherwise see them.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I was just talking about this recently,
of course, missing PyCon in person,
but I think what I learned for me,
at least the hack of PyCon,
which was realizing that all the great talks were online
and there was still a few that I would go to,
but where all the real value for me at PyCon was,
was talking to people, the hallway conversations,
the energy and the synergy of ideas.
Oh, you're looking into that.
I'm looking into this.
Look how that stuff goes together.
So that to me was really the value of PyCon in person.
- Yeah, I totally agree.
That's why I would go as well.
- My best part is walking down the hallway with Barry
and watching thousands of people come up and say,
"Oh my God, Barry, I love you so much."
- No.
Now, now-
- I mean, every continent, Barry is loved.
- Oh my gosh.
This is not my normal BS.
This is actually literally true.
- Like real BS.
You know, it's really, really funny.
'Cause, you know, walking around with Guido,
and Guido is the rockstar of the Python community
in a lot of ways, of course.
And I always felt like I was playing my bass player role
in Python too, it was great.
- Oh yeah, yeah.
- I'm just back here doing my thing.
- That's perfect, that's exactly right.
- A beautiful supporting role right there.
- Yeah, exactly.
- In the music line.
So, fantastic.
Oh, we're gonna get back to these conferences
and these get togethers.
I know we will.
And I'm even gonna try to get the most
out of the online events.
Like I registered for PyCon and I'm looking forward to it.
I'm gonna try to make the most of it.
Now, before we get into the main topic,
maybe you guys can tell yourself,
tell everyone a little bit about yourselves.
You know, Barry, how'd you get into programming in Python?
- Oh, well, I got into Python in 1994.
I had just been hired at CNRI.
And we were starting at this project called
the Nobot Programming Environment or something like that.
- Okay, what was that?
- These were little software agents
that were supposed to travel around the internet
and get a little bit of information here,
package themselves up, move over there,
do some action over here,
and move around to a bunch of different nodes.
This was an important part of CNRI's
digital library initiative at the time.
And Roger Massey, who was my colleague at CNRI,
we looked at, we were using Next Step and Objective-C
and sort of doing that.
And then, you know, I had worked at
the National Institute of Standards and Technology
earlier in my career, and I still had friends there.
And one of the friends, of course, Paul knows,
Ken Manheimer, who is the unsung hero for where Python is,
because he crops up in so many places, you know?
- Every Emacs RC file on the internet goes back to him.
- Exactly.
I haven't talked to Ken in a long time,
but I hope he's doing well, 'cause I always,
Ken's a great guy.
So Ken was still at CNRI, and he forwarded to me an email
saying, "Hey, this Dutch guy's coming over, you know,
"to talk about this language that he created."
- He's bringing a crazy language with no cynical.
- Exactly, exactly.
So we kind of pulled down Python at the time,
played with it, and went, "Oh, this is pretty interesting."
So, you know, it was close to where we lived.
So we just cruised up to Gaithersburg, Maryland,
and spent three days at the first workshop,
which, of course, Paul was at as well.
He can talk about his experience.
And we just, like, totally fell in love with Python,
really, you know, resonated with Guido
and what he was doing with the language.
And, you know, long story short, ended up hiring Guido,
bringing him over to the States.
- Oh, fantastic.
- You know, worked with him at CNRI for eight years.
- An important part of the story, Barry,
is CNRI meant something.
- Yeah.
- It's kind of, it viewed itself,
I think it viewed itself as kind of the steward
of the internet.
- Well, of course, you know, CNRI was run by Bob Kahn
and Vince Cerf at the time.
And, you know, ran the IETF meetings,
which, of course, are all the internet, you know,
internet RFCs and things like that.
So, and it was a not-for-profit research shop.
So it really was kind of well-positioned
to be Python's home for all those years,
because, you know, there wasn't any sort of
commercial aspect to it.
It was all not-for-profit, and it was really,
it was, you know, Python was a really good, you know,
piece of technology, I think.
And I think CNRI was a really good home for Python.
- Yeah, it was a good breath of fresh air
in terms of, you know, like compared to C at the time,
where this fledgling Java thing
that some company made up.
- Yeah, yeah.
So how did you, how was--
- A comment I was gonna make on that is,
Barry and I give this talk, Python 1994.
We wear our shirts, we didn't wear our shirts tonight.
- No, although.
- And each time I kind of learn,
I see, I learn a little bit more.
- I love it.
- Level of Python, yeah.
(laughing)
I got to say something like that.
- I'm sure you have every shirt.
- Yeah.
- But there's kind of this, it's a narrow run thing,
the sequence of dominoes.
And the fact that you were at CNRI,
and then CNRI was a place to go,
if it would have been some other place, who knows?
If you wouldn't have been at NIST
before you landed at CNRI
and the Michael McLean connection at NIST, who knows?
- Yeah.
- So that's an interesting point.
- As much as you try to plan your life out
and guide it in directions,
these little happenstance experiences
are sometimes the biggest pulls.
- And you know, I had it come out to California
a few months before I joined CNRI.
And I interviewed with a company called Lucid.
I don't know how many people remember Lucid, but-
- Oh yeah.
- They had this nice compiler suite
and they were using Emacs.
They had a fork of Emacs that they were using as their UI.
And that was a version of Emacs that I was using at the time.
So I came out here, interviewed,
and ended up not moving out here,
which was also another one of those fortuitous events
in my life, certainly,
because then just a couple of months later,
I ended up at CNRI.
And then a few months after that, met Guido
and just took off from there.
So you just never know.
Yeah, you never know.
- Yeah, and that's such an interesting time.
Paul talked about being like the shepherd of the internet.
1994, well, a year before,
that's when the graphical web, HTTP,
that whole story came around.
I remember seeing Mosaic the first time
and just seeing what the web was.
And I was supposed to go to a physics class or something,
like an evening physics lecture.
And I'm just like, I'm skipping my class.
I have half, I cannot believe that this is a real thing.
I had been on Gopher and Archie
and all of these things and telling them.
I'm like, I'm seeing an entirely new world.
I was so powerful to me to see that.
So that's in the same time that all this is happening.
- Yeah, it was a pretty magical time, I think.
- Yeah, it was.
It absolutely was.
Let me just highlight a couple of things real quick
before we move off your introduction.
You were interviewed as part
of this really interesting story,
"Python is Eating the World,"
how one developer's side project
became the hottest programming language on the planet.
So that was a really cool article.
I remember that.
And then-
- Hey, Barry, you look good in that photo, man.
- Yeah.
(laughing)
His colleague does.
So, and then another thing that was really interesting
was the Pep8 song that Leon Sandoy recently released,
came out and I was like, oh, what a cool, clever idea.
And then I realized today that you wrote
and recorded "The Zen of Python" as a song.
- Yeah.
- Just nine months, at least you published it
to SoundCloud nine months ago.
That's a really cool song.
I'll share the link with people
so they can check that out for sure.
- Yeah, and there is a, I did a, like a, you know,
a quote, unquote, lyric video, you know, where I had,
I basically did an iMovie.
I took that soundtrack and I put,
I put "The Zen of Python" lyric, you know,
I call them lyrics, but,
which I think we have to give a lot of credit-
- Other people call it "Import This" or something like that?
- Yeah, yeah, "Import This,"
which of course comes from Tim Peters,
who's, you know, even predates me in the Python land,
you know, and Paul too, I guess.
I think Tim was involved in Python
almost from the beginning, you know?
And, you know, he was of course our colleague,
you know, as we were in Python labs and, you know,
and so on and so forth, so.
And Tim wrote "The Zen of Python," so.
- Yeah, yeah, it's really neat.
I think that's an interesting set of principles there.
All right, Paul, how about you?
- This is the, how do I get into Python question?
- Yeah, maybe programming.
I mean, you told the story a bit before, but yeah,
like how do you get into this whole programming thing?
- a cool program at school
where we had a lab that had a bunch of stuff,
the Commodore PETS, TRS-80,
but the one that really stuck out to me
was a DEC teletype connected to a mainframe
at the university 200 miles away.
And so--
- You probably didn't even have to log in
to connect to it, right?
There probably wasn't even a--
- Log in.
- Yeah, probably didn't even have to connect.
- Exactly, just connect.
- Exactly, yeah.
- I got my own port, we're good.
- Yeah, and so a modem, and what freaked me out was
this modem is connected to the mini computer
or mainframe or whatever,
but if you called this phone number,
this phone from this phone five feet away,
it was a long distance call.
(Paul and Jeff laughing)
- And that used to matter.
That's also a thing I kind of forgot, right?
It was expensive.
You're like, oh, there's this really sweet BBS
that's got this information I want,
but it's in another state,
so we can only talk to it for so long.
And you know, better hope you got 9600 baud
and not 300 baud or whatever you're gonna get.
Crazy.
- Briefly, my Python origin story is,
so Navy officer, working in Penn School
for a great guy named Jim Glenn.
'93, we did www.navy.mil,
a source of infinite funny stories, some of them true.
And there was a scripting, you know,
it was pre CGI, but the same idea,
you fork, standard out, standard in.
And some of the people were writing
their web server stuff, dynamic stuff in C,
not gonna do that.
Some were doing it in Bash, not gonna do that.
So Pearl, I have this vivid memory, this story is true.
Vivid memory of going to the bookstore,
going to the computer shelf, it wasn't a section,
get in the Pearl book.
I can remember where I was staying,
I'm like, "Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm."
Oh, hell no.
(laughing)
Get back on the shelf.
There was this downloadable tutorial
for this thing called Python,
and it was a scripting language.
So it didn't reach for me.
And damn, if that thing wasn't written for my brain,
it was like perfectly the entrance for me into this.
- Yeah, yeah.
- That's awesome.
Yeah, I think a lot of people, Python connects right away.
- Yeah.
- It depends on your history.
If you've been writing C languages for a long time,
you have to sort of break the paradigm, right?
But you'll get there.
- It's funny that Paul talks about Pearl,
because, you know, I have the classic Pearl book,
and I was into Pearl and Tickle,
and I know you wanna ask about this.
- The camel book?
- The camel book.
And it was totally dog-eared,
and the spine was destroyed,
because I could never keep Pearl in my head.
And I think I have the first Python book,
and it's like pristine,
because Python just kind of fits in your head.
- That's a good story.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
That's awesome.
- Yeah.
- All right, before we move off your introduction,
Paul, I just wanna give a quick shout-out
to two things that you and I did recently
that was fun, people might also like.
So you and I did, when I got my Apple Mac Mini M1
back in December,
you and I did a nice walkthrough,
sort of exploration, like, well, can you,
how does Python work over here?
Can you run Jupyter Notebooks?
What's the ripple like?
And just, we compared a bunch of stuff,
and that was a whole lot of fun.
So I'll link to that, as well as,
we also did a, over at JetBrains, where you work,
we did a cool webcast,
let's build a fast, modern Python API with FastAPI,
and we just built that out.
And, yeah, you got--
- If I may say, Michael set the all-time JetBrains record
for webinar attendance, it lasted one month,
but you held it for a month.
- Hey, that's awesome.
I mean, so cool, thanks for having me over there.
But now I wanna take you all on a journey.
I wanna start you to take us on a journey.
Check this out.
You guys remember that?
- Ooh. - Oh, yeah.
- So what we have on the screen here, folks,
is I couldn't get any earlier than 1997,
but this is the 1997 Python.org.
And it's got the original Python label,
which is like one of those light board type things.
And it talks about what Python is.
So Python is this interpreted, interactive,
object-oriented, extensible programming language,
and it provides an extraordinary combination
of clarity and versatility.
It is free, it runs on Unix, PC, Macintosh, and others,
and it's really interesting that it describes itself
as free and non-proprietary, right?
Like even, it almost predates
this kind of Zen of open source side.
It's just, you know, we'd have built this thing,
he doesn't want it to be corporate,
doesn't want it to be commercial,
how can we build it as a community?
So he was really blazing that trail, right?
- It's pretty funny.
I see the sixth International Python Conference there
and Grail.
That's a story. - Grail, that jumped out.
- That's a story, yeah.
- That is a story, that's an episode.
- Oh yeah.
A final version of Grail 0.3 is out.
What's Grail?
- Grail was a Python,
completely Python-based web browser that ran,
I think it was, we used Tcl/tk to render.
That interesting story there,
at least the way I remember it,
so, you know, it could all be lies, who knows,
was, you know, it kind of fit in with this notion
of these software agents, because we had this idea,
I think it was around the time of sort of Java
in the browser, but I don't remember exactly the timing.
- General Magic was the ones that were really pushing
the mobile code thing.
- Yeah.
So the idea was we wanted to be able to run Python
in the browser, right?
And Bob had come, the way I remember it, at least,
Bob had sort of had this idea about the same time
and came to Guido and myself and the team and said,
"Wouldn't this be a great thing if we had, you know,
"Python running in the browser?"
And Guido was pretty much like,
"Yeah, you wanna see it?"
You know, he had already done it, right?
So, you know, right about the time Java
in the browser was happening, you know,
Python in the browser was working.
So that's what Grail was.
- How interesting.
I think that even predates JavaScript.
- Yeah, I think it does.
- I think that's '97 or something like that.
I can't remember exactly, but.
- I can't tell you how much time I wasted
trying to get tables working in Tcl TK
inside of that Grail thing.
(laughing)
- A layout engine in Tcl TK.
Oh my goodness.
- It was brutal.
- Yeah.
A couple of thoughts on what you guys are saying.
John Sheehan says, "Just fits in my brain.
"It's probably the most quoted reason people like Python."
- Yeah.
And Jessica's pretty impressed at the age of this page.
Yeah, that's like, think about how easy it used to be
to do web design.
You're like, "Okay, I can bold that section
"and we'll put a horizontal line."
Like, wow, you're a designer.
That's incredible.
It was so bad.
It was so bad that it was like this opportunity.
Really, really, really interesting.
So, you know, let's jump back there.
You know, like what other,
we talked about some of these technologies,
Perl and Tcl and so on.
And the reason you guys chose 1994
is this is when the first Python conference
or workshop happened, right?
You kind of partially mentioned that before, yeah?
- Yeah, that's, I mean, that's certainly when I met Paul
and Jim Fulton and a lot of, you know,
Skip Montanaro at the time.
Steven Majewski, right?
- Yeah, Robin Friedrich.
- Robin Friedrich.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think there was only 20 of us at that workshop.
- Yeah, that's what I was gonna ask.
You know, I go to PyCon
and it's selling out the Cleveland Convention Center
and who knows what it would have done in Pittsburgh
if that ever happened.
But, you know, it's a really big gathering.
Like, I am, my voice is gone.
My legs are tired from walking.
And I, you know, maybe it takes me multiple days
to get through the expo floor, right?
Probably wasn't like that in the first one, right?
It was-
- No, it was just, you know, like I said-
- I mean, I joke about it.
When we heard we had room for 20 people, we're like, wow,
what were we gonna do with all this room?
You know, in this closed windowless office building
in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
- Yeah, yeah.
We had people, I won't mention any names,
but there was at least one person who I can think of
who said, you know, you can't even mention that I'm here,
that we use Python.
- Oh, I know who that is.
- Because it's a competitive advantage, right?
- Yeah, interesting.
- It was just like the fact that they were using Python
was a secret, you know?
So times have really changed quite a bit.
- But it's kind of an important point
that Barry and I try and talk about in the talk is,
what was it like?
Did you know, did we know then that it was a thing?
Are there things from later in Python
that you can trace back to that origin story?
It's kind of an interesting thought exercise.
You don't wanna romanticize the past,
but at the same time, you know, I think Barry,
you and I have kind of a similar impression
about kind of how things went down there.
- Yeah, I mean, again, it's all these little lucky changes,
you know, twists and turns in life and technology
and things like that.
But I think it's really clear.
And I did a talk in 2018 for Bay Piggies,
which is the Bay, you know, the Bay area.
And I went back and I tried to, you know,
download as many versions of Python.
I couldn't build a single one of them on any like modern OS
without changes.
But I went through like all the change logs
and the what's new and things like that.
And you can really trace the history of the language
all the way through.
You can see the thread, you know, from even before I,
you know, I think it was like version 0.91
is the first one you can pull down.
And you can really see how Guido's vision
for the language that he wanted to put out there
is still alive today.
It's still really, even through Python 3,
through the type hinting,
any new feature you wanna talk about,
the flavor, the sense of Python is still, you know.
- It feels really continuous, you know.
One of the similar thought paths I like to go down
or analogies I like to draw is,
well, JavaScript came along and did some stuff.
And then they said, well, let's add things like type hints
and async and let's make this TypeScript language.
In my experience going down that path was,
oh, JavaScript's kind of easy.
Why is it so complicated now?
There's all these like dependencies in other libraries
and libraries of libraries and left padding things.
And then, you know, it got to TypeScript
and I'm like, this is a really frustrating addition
'cause 80% of the time it's like,
wow, what a cool addition.
Oh, wait, this thing I need to use
doesn't have some right type definition.
So I can't, how come it won't let me use this thing?
And somehow Python has managed to grow through the years
with those types of additions without going like,
oh, why is it, why does it hate me now?
Like, why do I have to fight it so much?
You know, it just, you can kind of,
actually, I think more broadly,
this is like a really powerful aspect of Python
is that you can use and understand and take
as little or as much of it as makes sense for you.
Like you can be super effective
with a very partial understanding of Python, right?
I know how to import modules, call some cool functions.
I didn't have to write a method.
I just put these 10 lines in here
and look what amazing thing I did
where so many languages don't do that.
And I think that that's a really powerful aspect
that it has these cool features,
but they're not like in your face, like a lot of languages.
- Yeah, Paul may have additional thoughts,
but I think that's, I think you're onto something there
because I've always considered Python
the type of language that really scales
with whatever you're trying to do, right?
If I'm just gonna throw a, you know, I just need a script.
I have this, and this is kind of a funny thing.
I was upgrading one of my machine, my Macs to Big Sur,
and I lost all of my notes for,
like I use the Notes app religiously.
- Right, and it should go through iCloud,
but because it's Apple, sometimes it doesn't.
- Yeah, sometimes it just doesn't work.
So I actually like did a little bit of searching,
found the SQLite database and played around with the scheme.
I try to figure things out.
And then I wrote a little Python script, you know,
25, 30 lines to just like suck it out
of the SQLite database.
And, you know, I restored all my notes.
So even at that level, you know, Python's awesome,
but then, you know, you can build huge applications
in Python, especially with type, you know,
the typing, type hinting, it just scales.
Python just scales with whatever you want to do, you know?
- Yeah, yeah.
And there's a lot of languages that go to that far end,
but you've got to start somewhere in the middle, right?
You've got to understand, you know, nullable optional types.
And no, you can't set that to nil because, you know,
just like all that kind of stuff, right?
Eventually you might want that,
but you shouldn't have to have it all the time.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I think that's magic.
- One that is, I guess one of the last talks I gave
was at PyCon, Colorado, which was a wonderful conference.
And I was actually giving Python 1994 there as a keynote.
And right when I got to the part about spam two,
when we first heard of Java, no kidding, thunder.
(imitates thunder)
It was like the most awesomely theatrical thing.
Perfect timing.
- You are a dramatic speaker, that was good.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so I've got this look on my face like,
okay, you won't believe this.
But what they told me was at the meetups,
like 70% of the people coming to the Python meetups
just came to Python less than a year ago.
- Yeah.
- And if you look at the Python developer survey,
which you were talking about in the most recent Python Bytes.
- Yeah, I was going to say, there's some company,
it's called JetBrains, they did this survey.
And it's like 150% of the Python community
arrived yesterday, you know?
- Yeah, yeah.
- And let's face it, where are they coming
from data science?
And let's face that, why are they coming to Python?
Because Michael, what you just said,
jump right in, start coding,
you don't have to eat your vegetables.
- Yeah, exactly.
I'm trying to find this for us here and find the exact.
- But actually I will try to tie it back
to our alleged agenda.
- We have an agenda.
- Who were we fighting in 1994, scripting languages?
It was Perl and Tcl and then, and then, and then Python.
And we were all lumped into this toy language scripting
and the grownups would come back later
and reprogram it all in a serious language
and stuff like that.
And wow, how did that turn out?
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I think there's a lot of special stuff
about this entry level that is,
to me it feels almost like a stealth way
to capture people's excitement and energy around programming.
It's like, ah, I'm not a programmer,
but I've heard that there's some cool libraries
for working with whatever I do, biology, chemistry,
whatever, economics.
And if I just import this and do these three lines,
like I'll do something really amazing.
And probably that person's colleagues are like,
wow, you're a wizard.
How did you do this?
Like, well, it was like these four lines, right?
And they just slowly make it a little better,
a little better, and they never think of themselves
as programmers.
And then like two years later,
they're building machine learning,
put in production, with behind Flask or FastAPI.
And they're like, how did I get here?
Like, I just never even knew I was gonna be here, right?
And I think that's the magic is you just,
you don't get ejected.
It's not like, well, I made it sort of this far.
Now it's time for a grownup language.
Go learn C++ and be real now, right?
Like that doesn't often happen.
Here's the part, here's the part you were talking about, Paul.
That, again, the fact that like Python scales
from throwaway scripts to huge applications,
it also really scales to the experience
of the person using it.
So it appeals to non-programmers
who are just trying to get their other stuff done, right?
And they need to do some programming,
but it also somehow also appeals to professional programmers
who are building like production-level quality software.
And it just resonates with both those audiences.
- Yeah, I love that.
- What was Tim Peters doing before Python?
Oh yeah, writing compilers for Cray computers.
(laughing)
You got a problem harder than that?
No, I don't.
(laughing)
- Well, yeah, you know,
one of the things I think is interesting
is I was just reminiscing about talking to Mamoud Hichemi
four or five years ago about Python and the enterprise
and how it was kind of a really interesting story
that big companies that were not just tech giants,
but boring, quote, boring insurance companies and stuff.
And I use that in a positive sense right now.
They were also using Python in really interesting ways.
Like Bank of America has a Python project
with 5 million, sorry, 5,000 Python developers
and millions of lines of code.
And that kind of stuff is,
I think at least when I would talk to people,
it felt like that was noteworthy
to have those conversations five years ago.
And now it's just like, well, yeah, we are.
Who would not?
Like, it'd be insane not to do this.
Most companies at least have like a data science wing
or something that's all about Python.
You know, project that from 1994 forward.
Like, how does that, like, how did that feel
to see it that way now?
And what was the perspective back then?
- Again, this is, I think the magic secret sauce of Python.
Right back then it was CGI and, you know,
web programming and things like that.
And Python was perfectly suited for that.
And now we're, you know, fast forward 30 years or about,
and, you know, the domains that are sort of the hot things
that everybody needs to be able to do,
Python just is malleable.
It's just, it just adapts to that environment.
I mean-
- A lot of surprising things are Python first now.
Like a lot of the ML stuff,
which sounds computationally insanely heavy,
is still, you know, Python first
because that's the way people want to talk to it.
Who cares how its guts get over to the GPUs or whatever.
- Exactly, exactly.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I even saw that that little helicopter rover thing
flying around Mars had a little bit of Python involved in it.
As far as I can tell though,
the system that they're using,
I went to the GitHub repository and poked around.
People are like, you know, Python's on Mars,
Python's on Mars.
I'm like, all right, well, let's see some details.
As far as I can tell,
Python was used to train the models on there.
But I don't know that it's executed.
There's a bunch of C++ code
and I suspect that's what's actually executing the stuff
that was trained up. - Probably.
- But still pretty interesting
that it was part of the story.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so, you know, the things that we talk about now,
Bill, Async and Await, TypeHence,
web stuff, machine learning.
Like those, a lot of those things,
maybe the Gil was worth,
was really on the radar then.
But a lot of the stuff like TypeHence and ML and whatnot
are fairly new, I suspect.
What kind of things did you all talk about
back in '94 and '95 and so on?
Like what was the important stuff
that you had to work out then?
- The things I remember from the first workshop
were the Don Beaudry meta class hook.
Did I steal your thunder?
Sorry, Paul.
Go ahead, you can take it.
- No, hit it.
Just don't make a mess of it.
- Well, the funny thing was, you know,
I had just started getting into Python.
So like a lot of that kind of went over my head.
I didn't really quite understand
'cause I hadn't looked at the details
of like the implementation of the object model
and things like that at the time.
So I didn't really understand completely.
I sort of understood metaprogramming a little bit,
but I didn't quite get what Don
and Guido were talking about at the time.
And I think Jim was involved, Jim Fulton as well,
'cause he had, I guess you guys were sort of thinking
about ZOPE or whatever the precursor to ZOPE was,
and he was thinking about metaprogramming for that.
- Yeah, and it's weird.
I think it was 'cause of Fortran for whatever reason,
interfacing Fortran in Python.
I might have that wrong, but Don Beaudry,
okay, so I'll unwind it a little bit.
At that workshop, Michael,
some of the things you were just saying,
you can't, like Barry hinted at before,
you can trace back to that workshop.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And some of the problems that needed to be solved there.
The things I worked on were none of those,
but I observed the useful stuff.
And C extensions is everything that Barry
was just talking about.
It happens to be the tip of the iceberg
on why Python has this sudden resurgence
because NumPy is all under the water in C.
But back then, it was a mess,
and I'm using that as a joke
because Don Beaudry's extension ideas
and software were called mess.
And Jim came back later with extension class
that kind of formalized it.
This kind of gives genesis to when you briefly,
in Python 2, used to import from object,
or I'm sorry, subclass from object
to kind of get new style objects and stuff like that.
That's a little remnant from,
I think a little bit from those days.
- That was more like a Python 2 thing
where the new, like we had classic classes,
which were the old style class hierarchy,
and then the new style classes,
they lived together for a long,
until Python 3, obviously.
And you had to either,
you had to basically like inherit from object
or set your meta class,
dunder meta class attribute to do it.
- But the point is, back in those days,
interfacing the big pile of C code was such a big deal
'cause we were the kid little toy scripting language.
- Right, yeah.
- You know, and it's just so interesting to me
that we went through a phase of outgrowing that,
and you had these enormous systems
that are mostly the waters being carried in Python.
Now back to the chief value proposition
is run that crap on the GPU
and let the programmers hang out in Python.
- Right, or some distributed grid computing,
or I don't wanna know where,
just run it in a low level thing.
And I wanna talk to it in this simple, clean API.
Yeah.
- Yeah, the irony of course, I think,
is that in a lot of ways,
the C API is holding us back now.
- Sure.
- To be honest with you,
you know, there are-- - Yeah, sure.
- The way I-- - You wanna change
the memory management model to be more GC or do a JIT?
It's all easy except for those little pointers
you passed off, who knows what happens now, right?
- Exactly, and the macros that are used to access tuples
and so on and so forth,
references, those are all issues that are holding back,
I think, I mean, sort of the way I think about it is,
there's nothing wrong with Python the language
today that would prevent it from being the language
of choice 30 years from now.
But we're also dealing with,
the CPython interpreter is a 30 year old VM.
And we've learned a thing or two about like how to write
high performance VMs in that time.
And getting the CPython implementation modernized
to the point where we can do things like
potentially remove the GIL or adopt a GC
or all those kinds of things that we wanna do.
We have to now deal with 30 years of backwards compatibility
and that's a difficult problem to,
both a technical and a social problem to overcome.
- Well-- - And we're older than Java.
- Yeah, well, the other thing I think, Barry,
that is makes that really significant is,
there's the technical problem.
I think honestly, you could say,
we're gonna just change the way it works.
And the important stuff's gonna get upgraded
and the stuff that hasn't been touched for five years,
it's just gonna have to run on the old thing
and we could just move forward, right?
That would be fine.
But I look at the difference between Python 2 and Python 3
and they seem really small to me, right?
A little bit with strings and bytes,
a little bit on classes, a few things.
And that was, that was existentially bad,
that disjoint eight year period where the core developers
were working on one thing and so many other people are like,
well, we're not gonna touch that thing.
We're just gonna work on, right?
That was not a good deal.
And the types of changes that you all are talking about,
while maybe awesome,
they seem more significant than that, at least.
And I suspect that people, at least for a while,
are not willing to stomach another round of that.
What do you think?
- I actually, I think if there ever is a Python 4
and I kind of doubt there will be a Python 4,
I think it's not gonna be at the Python level.
To the extent that it's possible to like, for example,
remove the gill and not require Python level changes,
which is still questionable,
but it's all gonna be at the C API,
at the FFI sort of level, right?
It's gonna be the things that Python integrates with
that are gonna change significantly.
And I think that's, if I had my magic hat on
with a million dollars and I don't know,
a few tens of people to work on it, that's what I would do.
- Yeah, you could change the way it runs
without changing the language whatsoever, right?
That would be totally fine.
- Yeah, yeah.
And I don't think there's any magic.
Like if, you know, when I talk to people
who have worked on JavaScript VMs or other VMs,
like we know what to do.
It's no, there's no magical thing
that we have to go figure out.
This has all been done over and over again.
Not that I could do it,
but you know, experts in building VMs could certainly do it.
But it's managing that, I think the social side,
like what do you do about NumPy
and all the C extensions that are out there?
That's a big ask.
- Eric Snow's effort with sub-interpreters
is kind of generated a lot of what about us from NumPy.
- Yeah. - Oh, really?
Okay.
- Yeah, that's one of the attempts to not remove the gill,
not a colectomy, but a, let's just have many gills
and they can all coexist.
- Right, right, right, right.
- Yeah, so just sort of on this historical,
like broad picture kind of journey we're on.
You know, you mentioned like very,
you mentioned JavaScript JITs and VMs.
Does it surprise you guys what has happened
with JavaScript and its performance and stuff?
This thing that just ran in web browsers
and now it's, they've gotten it to perform reasonably well.
To me, I just never saw that little thing
going where it's ended up either.
- Yeah, I don't know.
It doesn't really surprise me too much
because I think, and Paul probably understands this,
you know, like languages are a lot like editors, right?
Like there's a religious part, maybe not religious,
but there's a, there's an emotional--
- Identity part. - Tribalism.
- Yeah, tribalism, that's a great,
or emotional connection to it.
You know, people love Python and they wanna use it
and you know, that gets them into that world.
There's a lot of people whose first real experience
with programming is sort of web technologies,
JavaScript, CSS, HTML, things like that.
- Especially in the bootcamp side of things these days.
They've all seemed to have really, really glommed on
to that, almost I think to detriment for folks,
but you know, I think they've generated too many
just front end developers and not like broad skilled folks,
but anyway, that's a side story.
- Yeah, so you know, people, that's, you know,
young people come in and they learn JavaScript
and they enjoy it and they can, you know, get,
see the results immediately in their browser
and do really cool things.
And so I think it's a natural progression
to wanna be able to take that environment
or that experience and move it into other domains.
And some, you know, JavaScript seems to be, you know,
pretty malleable about that, you know.
- So what about having, one of the value propositions
in the JavaScript world is it's JavaScript
all the way down, you know, could it be Python
all the way down, right?
Like in the reverse direction, sort of.
What do you guys think of the opportunity of web assembly
and that sort of like expand the places
that Python is happy?
- Yeah, Paul, you wanna?
- Sure, and I know you did a podcast with Brett
about this at the last PyCon.
- And we did a live one, yeah, exactly.
We talked about the opportunity of Rust
and web assembly for that, yeah.
I mean, they kind of go together.
- So in theory, that should be like Python's big chance
to kind of, 'cause Python, and this is the,
my little passion project working on the weekends
about Python and the modern web and Python's web story
and there's a lot of hope misplaced in my opinion
on Wasm as a silver bullet for Python.
Heavy lift to kind of get there
and the destination probably won't be what you think.
But at the same time, it has opportunities
that I don't think we quite understand and appreciate
from a platform that we could benefit
even on the server side, even on the mobile side
to be not just producers of Wasm, but consumers of Wasm.
- Yeah, there's a really cool Python library
that will let you interop with any Wasm language.
- Yes.
- I forgot what it's called, but it's not in the browser.
It's just locally.
- Sure, right.
- You get some Wasm library that could be written in C,
it could be written in Java,
whatever compiles down to that in Rust
and then I'm gonna use that in Python.
- I'm glad you're bringing it up
and it's nice to tie it in a way that 1994
because I do care a lot about Python and the web
and I worry and I give talks about Python
and the modern web.
But it's interesting, a name we didn't mention
kind of along your lines of JavaScript
kind of eating the world
and maybe Michael Kennedy's talk JavaScript to me
coming to a theater near you sometimes.
(laughing)
And the one that came out of nowhere
and ate the world in the first third of Python was PHP.
- Oh yeah.
Yeah.
- And it should have run off, it should have hit its ceiling
and maybe a little bit like x86,
maybe a little bit like JavaScript,
maybe like a whole bunch of other things
that should have jumped the shark.
There were plenty of sharks left to jump.
And PHP got bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger
and was being used for things
that never should have been used for
because the law of large numbers.
And we just gotta be worried about the law of large numbers
with JavaScript as well.
- Yeah, for sure.
John Sheehan says, transcript.
- Transcript, yes.
I have for my little secret project
actually originated with generating some transcript
from Python side components.
- Interesting, yeah.
You know, a world that I would love to see is,
like the reason that JavaScript is so popular
is it's a non-avoidable requirement
'cause it's the thing that all the browsers ship with
that have a runtime.
With WebAssembly, it's totally simple to compile
CPython over there.
There's things that don't work
and there's maybe some edges you gotta fix.
Probably also for the JVM,
probably also for the .NET runtime.
All these runtimes, they could be put into this form
if the browsers would ship language runtimes.
If they would just go,
our browser includes CPython, includes .NET, includes Java.
Oh, it also includes JavaScript.
That would just change the game.
But because every alternative is like,
well, you need a 20 meg download.
Well, that's a different,
oh, well, that's not gonna work, right?
The browser people could decide.
There's only two of them left in the world.
Maybe three if you count Safari.
But really, it's Chrome and then Firefox
and a little Safari.
It wouldn't be that hard to say,
let's try to make some of these other languages available
as runtimes through WebAssembly.
We already do WebAssembly.
Just ship the binary and we'll be good to go.
I would love to see that,
but I'm not seeing any movement there.
- Yeah, Barry has a story about JavaScript and Python.
- You know, it's funny you mentioned that
'cause I was gonna say that.
But I have since learned that it's not actually true.
So I'm gonna skip that one.
- I was watching Brendan Ike's podcast
and I was waiting for him to say it and he didn't.
- I have a colleague here at LinkedIn
who kind of hooked me,
not directly up with Brendan,
but I was like, am I misremembering this story?
And yeah, it's kind of true.
I was misremembering the story.
- I like your story though.
- It's a great story, it just wasn't true.
(laughing)
- Yeah, yeah.
RJL out there says that'd be a great idea, Michael.
What's stopping Google and Firefox from doing that?
I don't know. - Market forces.
- Well, I mean, to be fair,
Microsoft has created this thing called Blazor
that put the .NET runtime in there.
You just gotta download it, right?
So I would not actually be surprised
to see that ship with Edge at some point.
But that idea across,
at least let, I think JavaScript's fine,
but let's let it compete on fair playing ground, right?
Like where the other languages
could possibly even be an option.
So that would be fantastic for everyone, I think.
And with WebAssembly, there's some interop, so who knows?
So, you know, looking forward,
like are you guys just astonished
that that group of 20 people, 1994, worked on this project?
And then, you know, you get articles like that,
that tech one that I had about, you know,
Python is eating the world of software sort of thing.
Like, these are really big gaps.
Did you guys ever imagine that you were onto, you know,
a flame that would burn so bright?
- Oh, you wanna?
- This is, you and I talk about this
kind of in the closing a little bit.
And it's related to the why,
how did Python get to where it got to?
What were the ingredients?
Could you trace it back to then?
And when we gave the talk the first time
at the keynote panel at PyCon,
Jim Fulton actually brought this up,
that people talk about the Python community
being so kind and human,
and it's because Guido's kind and human.
And so kind of put into the DNA back to 1994
was a person and a group of people around
who valued those kinds of things
at a time when other language communities
had a bad reputation for those kinds of things.
Barry, you wanna expand on that?
- I think it was Brett Cannon who coined the term,
"I came for the language and stayed for the community."
And that is so true.
I mean, my closest friends,
and in many ways, I mean, Guido actually lives
not far from me now.
And I love just kind of getting together with him.
And a lot of times we don't even talk about Python.
- Yeah, that's right.
- I have some of my really valued friends
I've met through Python.
So I think it does come down to Guido's leadership
as far as personality and the kind of community
that he helped foster.
It feels very inclusive and very positive
and empowering to people.
And I just really think that the community
has done as much as the language
to sort of build Python to where it is today.
- Mike, I'll try and get back to your question a little bit
with a little bit of an anecdote.
- All right.
- The role in the play was never technical,
but I made coffee for the smart people.
And I would do some of the organization stuff
like the PSA and PSF with Greg Stein.
And then I went away for a while and lived in Europe,
didn't go to PyCons, came back,
and damn, if Capital One didn't have a booth at PyCon.
- Yeah.
- That blew me away.
Back when we had Spam One, Spam Two, Spam Three,
this NIST workshop, to think that would be an outcome.
And that these like really serious major players
felt like, wow, we gotta go do this.
It's just astonishing to me.
- Yeah, for me as well.
And I'm thinking back to the job fair
that was in the 2020 PyCon,
you know, walking around there,
you just, so many people are like,
we're hiring or building these Python teams
to build our software.
And some were, you know, the usual suspects,
but many of them were not.
Many of them were like you said,
like Capital One type of places.
You're like, you guys are doing this?
- Deloitte, I mean, really, wow.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, super, super interesting.
And I feel like the sentiment has shifted a little bit.
It used to be like, oh, these corporate entities
are gonna come in and like muck up our culture
and like break, they're gonna corrupt some of the,
they're gonna be somewhat corrupting influences.
And I feel like, I don't really see
that that's happened so much.
So I'm happy for that.
I feel like if anything, it's been a supporting type
of thing to have this much opportunity in this ecosystem.
- Absolutely.
- And something I'll add to that is,
as much as we cherish Python the language,
a perhaps not equal achievement,
but an important achievement is the PSF.
And it's underappreciated because Barry and I
were responsible for the failed predecessor,
Python's overactivity.
These things require a number of ingredients
and they require heroes.
And in the middle third of Python,
the PSF and PyCon emerged
and these are important achievements.
- Yeah, many people are probably aware of it.
I suspect many are not who are listening.
How important PyCon is for funding the PSF in general.
That's the vast majority of their income is through that.
And honestly, it was a big scare
on what's gonna happen when COVID hit.
They waited to the very last minute to cancel PyCon
when the writing was clearly on the wall
that people cannot go there.
But it's like, well, we gotta just figure out
all the finances.
It was a big deal, right?
- Yeah, huge.
And let me echo Paul,
because the PSF and the folks,
Eva and E and all the people who are involved in the PSF,
I can't even go through all the names.
They do such great work and important work
for the Python ecosystem and the Python community.
And kudos to every single one of them
'cause they're just fantastic people
and it's a great organization.
And the PSF is not only supports what Python is today,
but it really looks ahead.
So like on the steering council,
we work very closely with the PSF to try to understand
how can we utilize the PSF to help fund important work,
for example, that Python, the language
or CPython, the implementation really needs.
So that's a great partnership.
I think that's kind of built up over the years.
- Yeah, and there was just a big announcement
that Google became the first visionary sponsor of the PSF,
which is like $390,000 a year or something like that
in hiring a core developer in residence.
So yeah, that's a huge sign of big support coming along.
- Yeah.
- Maybe to close out this topic,
if anybody out there has concerns about the PSF
or like really deep seated problems with it,
and you see me and Barry sometime,
get us to tell you about the Python software.
- Yeah.
- You'll feel a lot better about the PSF.
- Yeah, that's good.
So on our little screen share here,
I put up the new Python, the latest Python.org
compared to the 1997 one.
And it just occurred to me one thing
that I went years without knowing
is there's this little prompt icon
right on the home page.
If you click that, oh, it's not working anymore.
Oh my goodness.
- Live demos, man.
- Yeah, I guess it doesn't work right now.
Maybe the Python Anywhere folks should have a look at this.
Probably it'll work by then.
- I'll get on the Slack channel.
- Yeah, yeah, let them know.
But I was really surprised you can go there and click
and it just opened up the Python or Apple,
I think running in Python Anywhere, generally speaking.
So yeah, very interesting.
All right, let's--
- It's a cool service they've done
for the community for that.
- Yeah, it's very easy to just kind of get started.
'Cause tracing that sort of
very partial understanding of Python,
what comes with that is also a partial understanding
of Linux, a partial understanding of servers,
partial understanding of SSH, partial,
like all these tools that you become so familiar with
to weave this stuff together.
In the beginning, these are major roadblocks.
You're like, how am I gonna do this thing?
There's these steps I need to learn
and services like that that make it real easy
and welcoming are pretty awesome.
So let's round out our conversation
with two quick thoughts.
One from both you guys.
So you're probably seeing some really big opportunities
that the Python ecosystem can take advantage of
and grow around.
And there's probably also some dangers,
there's some threats that we should maybe be aware of.
Russell Keefe McGee gave really interesting talk
about Black Swan events and Python and so on
and stuff like that.
So what do you think, opportunities,
things we should be worried about or pay attention to?
- Paul, you wanna take it?
- There's one that popped in my head.
It may have been because you mentioned Russell's
wonderful Black Swan talk,
which was kind of followed in my mind
by Lukasz Langa's PyLindenium talk,
which covered some of the same territory.
But what I'll talk about instead is the threat that wasn't,
or I'll talk about a couple of threats that weren't,
if that's okay.
Is that cheating?
- No, that's not fine.
I think that's an awesome history lesson, tell us.
- Yeah, I remember going to see Guido
when he was still with Google.
God, Barry, how long ago would that have been?
10, 12, 10 years?
- Yeah, at least, yeah.
- And even at that time, I was like,
it kind of struck me going over to go see him
in downtown San Francisco that he was in the process
of handing over the reins.
How many successful projects,
especially open source projects, don't outlive the founder?
- Yeah, true, yeah.
- And he's done wonderfully at that over the years.
And in fact, his participation now appears to be,
'cause I wanna, not 'cause I have to.
- Like I'm retired, I'll wait,
no, I'm just gonna play around.
- Indeed.
That was a threat that wasn't.
And then another threat that wasn't.
- Yeah, the whole formation of the steering council
on what was gonna happen when he retired and his,
you guys gotta figure it out, this is not on me.
- Indeed.
- You gotta live in what you come up with.
- Not just who it will be, figure out actually
what system it will be in.
- Yeah, exactly, how it was gonna work, exactly.
- Yeah, right.
Which is a wonderful act of humility on his part.
He didn't view himself as essential
to answering that question.
- And I think he really trusted the community
to come up with the right answers.
It was a really interesting time,
and I do think that the community came together.
And there was lots of discussion about how to do it,
and it really worked out.
And I think that set Python up for this kind of longevity
and continued success and continued relevance in technology.
- So then I'll do my other non-threat,
and then finally give you an answer on the threat.
Another non-threat that didn't happen was PEEK.
- Yeah.
- And right at the time when the PEEK should have happened,
maybe the first PEEK should have happened,
I'll, and Barry, please, in fact,
I would love Michael to do a show
on the actual story behind the story on this.
Jessica McKellar.
- Yep.
- In the middle third of Python,
the PSF and PyCon as an engine of revenue,
and then as an engine of gender diversity.
And bringing in a big, new, important, viable,
lot of vitality audience into Python.
Then on the way to data science doing the same thing.
So at a time when it should have perhaps been cresting,
it did a double dip inflection point.
Do you wanna comment on that, Barry,
before I go to an actual set?
- No, but I think that's one of the wonderful things
about the Python community.
You know?
And it's not just sort of, I mean,
it's not just on a gender.
Like, it's also, you know, getting young people involved.
- Sure.
- I think that's been a fantastic thing,
is to go to PyCon and see, you know,
kid, like, you know, secondary school kids,
and how it's being taught in colleges.
And I've always--
- Your son and my son went to the young coders on a--
- Yep.
- A long time ago.
- I have to tell you, I have to tell you,
I'm super proud 'cause my son is actually working in,
he's using Python at work these days.
So it's like, yes, it's awesome.
- That's fantastic.
- We're gonna be out earning you pretty soon, Barry.
- Hopefully.
- One could hope as a parent, right?
- Exactly.
- So my actual threat will go back to Russell and Lukas,
and man, I worry about Python in the web.
I worry that what we've said is we've ceded
the user interface to JavaScript frameworks in the browser.
And we're perfectly happy just shoving REST and JSON to them.
And what worries me is--
- They might just decide like,
why are we doing this other stuff?
We're almost all the way there.
Like, let's just, come on, let's just go express--
- If you're a business decision maker,
and you're like, okay, I've got two teams.
Why don't we got two teams?
And the one I value is the one that puts the pixels
that are sexy.
- They show me the shiny buttons and bits.
Yeah.
- And then as this modern web stuff kicks in
and website performance really, really, really
becomes a thing and people pre-render on the server.
So your React components have to be pre-rendered
on the server, which means you have to run React
on the server and you can't run React in Python.
So--
- Interesting, right.
The pressure to make it not--
- That's the one I've been a long time thinking about.
- Make it not load with empty curly braces
and then pop in all of a sudden.
Yeah, interesting.
Okay.
Yeah, that's a concern, yeah.
- I think the other thing that I'll add
is Python on mobile, right?
Like everybody's got a phone in their pocket,
and Python doesn't have a super great story there.
Things like, we have MicroPython, which has its place,
as smart homes, as IOT, and all those things
become more and more important in our lives.
I think Python needs to have a better story
for mobile as well.
So those are two big challenges.
- Yeah, if you're gonna ask me to make that,
I guess I would have said mobile as well.
I think the saving grace there maybe
is that mobile's so messed up also.
Like there's, it's so tricky.
You've got these different languages,
but they have these weird constraints,
and then you've gotta go through the app store gatekeeper
people and that's real, like, it's less of a straight--
- It's a more narrow ecosystem because you basically
have to-- - Exactly, but it's also
one of the most important ones, right?
I mean, it's where the really, really interesting stuff
is these days.
A couple of comments from the livestream,
Robert Robinson says, "I'd love to have learned Python
"in the mid-90s when I started learning programming.
"My life would be totally different now."
And John Sheehan says, "The item project
"looks really interesting."
Yeah, indeed.
All right, well, those are the downer sides of things.
Paul, one thing I would like to say about the web,
I do feel like there's a really interesting resurgence
in the Python web frameworks.
Now that the Python 3, that it was sort of crossed over,
and they're like, let's just take advantage
of all the modern Python goodies.
- Yes. - Things like FastAPI,
Starlet, as well as some other ones like Django Ninja
and whatnot are coming along to do interesting things
that make it feel really refreshing to do Python web stuff.
And I still think there's interesting things
that are happening there that are compelling.
I was talking to somebody, I can't remember the context,
but they had a Django system,
and some of the Django views were regular Python,
but they actually did some of them in Cython
'cause they had really high performance requirements.
And the views were computed in Cython,
which is, I mean, these are really interesting use cases
that are out there.
All right, really quick, we're running low on time.
Opportunities, what do you guys see as the big opportunity?
- That's a great question,
because I think it also comes into sort of predicting
where technology is going in the next few years.
And I don't really know that I can do that.
I mean, I've been surprised over and over and over again
in my career.
So again, I really think it comes down to,
the appeal of Python the language.
And really, one of the things I think Guido did,
back in the Jython days when JPython was the thing
and that became Jython,
was he recognized the need to sort of separate
the language evolution from the implementation.
Now, the reality is,
we've had multiple implementations of Python over the years,
and essentially, you see Python
is still the most popular version.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
And I think, as big companies have more and more Python
in their ecosystem of technology,
I think it becomes more imperative for them
to kind of step up and help fund those kind of,
like, I really think if we could just hit
some of those big people, big companies that we talked about,
get a million dollars from each of them,
man, you could do some really incredible stuff with Python.
- And they would benefit way more than that million dollars.
- Totally.
- Right?
- Yeah.
- Especially in Wall Street.
If you could make their trades one millisecond quicker,
boom, like that's just like printing money right there.
- What can't they do?
Hire people fast enough.
So make your current people more productive.
- Exactly.
And there's no reason why it can't be done.
Like I said, we have the organization
because the PSF is solid and knows how to do this,
knows how to manage these projects, right?
Is a non-for-profit, so there's no favoritism
going on there.
We have the technologists who can make this happen.
So--
- The track record to show that they can do it.
- Exactly.
So I think, to me, that is the biggest opportunity.
And if I saw that come together,
and those are some of the things that PSF
and the Steering Council are trying to put together.
So that is so exciting because it could be an amazing
25 years of more Python.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So I'll throw one out there for you all.
For a while, there was this language called Java,
you guys talked about it.
And that would seem to be the language
of the first year computer science program.
When I did computer science, I took a couple of classes,
my degree is in math,
but I took a couple of computer science classes
and that was Scheme and Lisp,
which I don't feel was the best option necessarily,
but that's what I did.
But for a long time, it was Java.
I think the big opportunity is so many people
are learning Python from the very beginning
that now it's in this place of,
well, why not Python instead of why Python, right?
If you're already working, you're already comfortable,
you've already done projects in it, you've had success.
Like, well, yeah, I could use other languages, but why not?
One thing that I think is really interesting
about this Stack Overflow trends
I have up on our screen shares,
do you notice how there's two humps every year for Java?
And a lot of the other ones, they don't have those humps,
but Java has two humps a year.
Those are fall semester and spring semester.
How interesting.
Those humps are going away at the end a little bit.
So they're kind of coming into the Python world.
So I think it's really interesting.
I think that's the opportunity is for the communities.
There's many fresh and excited young people coming in,
much like your survey showed
that professional coding experience,
the most common option was less than a year
for Python developers, right?
So there's a lot of fresh and exciting people coming in,
and I think that's all good.
I'll give an opportunity that's similar to that,
which is also non-technical, which is people oriented,
which is in the most recent Python Bytes,
Brian used a clever expression about the long tails
getting fatter or something like that.
I can't remember what the context was about.
The PSF diversity inclusion working group.
Expanding the footprint of Python in next level,
level markets and populations and groupings of people
with passions and interests.
- Yeah.
- Those-
- I think that-
- Yeah, go ahead.
- No, no, I was just gonna say,
these are all really super important things
because Paul and I have been involved in Python
for a long time, right?
Like, and as Guido retired, someday, hopefully, right?
And I think it's really important.
Like, I feel the responsibility more and more
to help mentor younger people who are coming into,
you know, technology in general,
but also into the Python community
and really nurture that engagement
because that's the energy that's gonna, you know,
propel Python forward, so, you know.
- And Michael, I gotta give you a pat on the back.
You've become a place to give a voice
to the next generation of stores.
So, Guido's here for that.
- Yeah, thank you so much.
That's really nice.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- I think one of the things that I've tried to do
is to try to find people
that have really interesting stories
of, like, how Python has, like, massively empowered them,
even if they haven't built
the most popular open source project
or they don't work at the biggest company.
Sometimes that story of, you know,
nothing to something really powerful,
even though not too many people know about it,
is really quite amazing, so.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, try to tell that.
Speaking of the education side,
RJL says, "At our science center,
we teach Python to STEM students, grades five to eight."
It's been really successful. - You're the hero.
- Yeah, man, awesome. - Yeah, wow.
Yeah, yeah.
- All right, guys, for the sake of time,
I'm gonna cut our final two questions
down to one question each.
Barry, I'm gonna give it to you first
'cause you're a bit of an unknown.
Paul, I'll see if I can guess his answer.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
- Emacs.
- Emacs, right on.
- Sorry, Paul. (laughs)
- I expect nothing less, Barry.
- All right, Paul, what are you feeling?
What are you doing these days?
- I have PyCharm open right now.
- Do you?
Awesome, fantastic.
Yeah, I don't have it open now,
but I'm loving that you guys built it for the M1.
It's so nice to work with these days.
Yeah, very good.
It's a great tool.
I think it's really good for helping people get into it,
but also, like, it scales as well.
It's great.
- Well, to speak for other products as well,
we're seeing the rise of smart editors
and smart tool chains for Python.
I think that's fantastic for everybody and all of us.
- Yeah.
It's really cool.
I mean, I acknowledge my minority status as an Emacs user,
even in like the tech space.
Like, there's many more Vim users,
but I can see my colleagues at work,
you know, what they use.
And it's really fantastic to see, like,
all the amazing support that these modern editors have
for Python.
- Yeah, I agree.
They take some of these ideas like type hints and stuff
and like amplify their value.
- Yeah, and integration with, you know,
static checkers and linters and mypy type checkers
and, you know, all that kind of stuff.
It's like, those are really important tools
for the modern Python, you know, developer.
And it's great to see all that stuff really well integrated.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Well, thank you both for being on the show.
You want to give a final thought,
a final comment to the people out there
thinking on this historical sort of arc
that we've been covering?
What do you want to say?
- You want to go first, Barry?
- Sure.
I'll say this, Python is where it is today
because of the people who have gotten involved
over the years, right?
And, you know, I talked to some folks who are like,
well, I don't know, I can't, I don't know C,
so I can't be involved in Python development.
No, that's not true.
In fact, you don't even need to be a programmer
necessarily to be involved in Python development.
Everybody is welcome and everybody's valued.
So if you like Python, get involved.
That might be with the PSF,
it might be with the language design, whatever it is.
- I mean, your favorite open source project
that's not strictly under CPython.
- Exactly, exactly.
All these things are available to anybody.
There's no cost other than an internet connection
and, you know, in a browser or an editor
or something like that.
Everybody can get involved.
And I really encourage,
I encourage everyone to sort of change the mindset of,
these are the barriers,
so therefore I can't get involved to,
these are the opportunities that I can shine
and grow and learn.
And so I think, you know, it's the people,
it always comes down to the folks.
- That's a great sentiment.
Paul?
- Maybe in a similar vein,
thinking about 1994 and driving back from girls
across practice to come be on the show.
I was thinking about, you know, most people in their lives,
they'll have something they're really passionate about,
but then a decade passes and their life changes
and they have kids or something.
- Gotta buy like a red convertible.
- So they change over to something else.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And then their kids move out of the house
and their passion changes to something else.
So during these decades of their lives,
they really latch onto something, believe deeply in it.
It's part of their identity, but then they move on.
And I think about for Barry and me,
and I get to be on the show with a fluffle,
and it's wonderful, a friendly language uncle for life.
And I've gone through those three decades,
and still, if I was to self-assess who I am,
what's my identity, who's my tribe, it's Python and the web.
And it's still the thing I believe in,
is how lucky am I?
- Yeah. - I mean,
that's just a graceful way to have the years go by.
- Yeah, yeah, hear, hear Paul.
It's been an amazing journey,
that's not over yet, hopefully.
And Python gave me a life, it really did.
So I'm so grateful to the language, the community,
to Guido, to everybody, Paul, everybody that I meet,
you know, Python's really an amazing,
been an amazing experience, a great ride.
- It's one of those types of things you can wake up and go,
I get to do this, like I don't have to do this.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Can you believe I get to do this?
They're gonna pay me for this,
I would have done this for free.
- Yeah. - That kind of stuff.
Yeah, it's fantastic.
All right, well, let's leave it there.
Thank you both for being on the show.
It's been really great to chat. - Michael, thank you so much.
- Thank you for having us.
- Yeah, it's been great. - Thank you, thank you.
Cheers.